docs/gallery/gallery.rst, before:

.. _gallery:

Nongaussian states gallery
##########################


Here you can find a curated list of circuits and measurements to prepare nongaussian states of interest in quantum optics, information, metrology and computing. 


If you develop a new circuit and measurement scheme to prepare a nongaussian state add it to the gallery!


.. Copy the template below in order to create a link to your notebook, and a thumbnail.

.. _Fock: fock.html
.. |fock| image:: fock.svg
   :width: 260px
   :align: middle
   :target: fock.html

.. _Cat: cat.html
.. |cat| image:: cat.svg
   :width: 260px
   :align: middle
   :target: cat.html

.. _Cubic: cubic.html
.. |cubic| image:: cubic.svg
   :width: 260px
   :align: middle
   :target: cubic.html

.. _Added: photon_added.html
.. |photon_added| image:: photon_added.svg
   :width: 260px
   :align: middle
   :target: photon_added.html


+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| |fock|                        | |cat|                         |   |cubic|                    |
|                               |                               |                              |
| Fock states                   | Kitten states                 |   Cubic phase states         |
+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| |photon_added|                |                               |                              |
|                               |                               |                              |
| Photon added states           |                               |                              |
+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+

Commit message:

Renames cat.* to kitten.* and updates gallery.rst

docs/gallery/gallery.rst, after:

.. _gallery:

Nongaussian states gallery
##########################


Here you can find a curated list of gaussian circuits and photon-number-resolved measurements to prepare nongaussian states of interest in quantum optics, information, metrology and computing.


If you develop a new circuit and measurement scheme to prepare a nongaussian state add it to the gallery!


.. Copy the template below in order to create a link to your notebook, and a thumbnail.

.. _Fock: fock.html
.. |fock| image:: fock.svg
   :width: 260px
   :align: middle
   :target: fock.html

.. _Kitten: kitten.html
.. |kitten| image:: kitten.svg
   :width: 260px
   :align: middle
   :target: kitten.html

.. _Cubic: cubic.html
.. |cubic| image:: cubic.svg
   :width: 260px
   :align: middle
   :target: cubic.html

.. _Added: photon_added.html
.. |photon_added| image:: photon_added.svg
   :width: 260px
   :align: middle
   :target: photon_added.html

.. rst-class:: gallery-table

+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| |fock|                        | |kitten|                      |   |cubic|                    |
|                               |                               |                              |
| Fock states                   | Kitten states                 |   Cubic phase states         |
+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| |photon_added|                |                               |                              |
|                               |                               |                              |
| Photon added states           |                               |                              |
+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
